Benny Tsai
600.465
Intro. to NLP
Assignment 1

*** IMPORTANT NOTE: "randsent" is written in Perl.  To get it to run in Barley type something like:
*** perl randsent [-t] <grammar file name> <number of outputs desired>

1.
SENTENCE 1
every sandwich in a fine perplexed president with a sandwich wanted a president !
SENTENCE 2
is it true that the sandwich in a pickle wanted a floor in a sandwich in a president on a president under every chief of staff with a pickle with a pickled chief of staff under the delicious chief of staff in every pickle on a pickle on the chief of staff ?
SENTENCE 3
every sandwich understood every pickle !
SENTENCE 4
the pickled perplexed president pickled a fine sandwich under the floor under every president in a president with the president on every delicious chief of staff on a sandwich in the fine sandwich under every chief of staff under a floor on every chief of staff under the floor in the floor on every floor under a delicious perplexed pickle under every floor under the chief of staff in the delicious sandwich with every pickled pickle in the president under every sandwich on every president under a chief of staff under a perplexed chief of staff under the pickle on the chief of staff under a pickle with a president under the president in a floor in the pickled president with a perplexed floor under every floor with every floor on every pickle with a perplexed sandwich with every pickle in every floor !
SENTENCE 5
every sandwich with a delicious chief of staff on a floor with a floor kissed every fine chief of staff .
SENTENCE 6
the delicious pickle under a president on the president kissed every delicious president with every chief of staff in every sandwich with the chief of staff !
SENTENCE 7
a chief of staff under the president ate the chief of staff !
SENTENCE 8
is it true that the president with a chief of staff with every floor in a floor on a chief of staff understood the floor on the floor under every sandwich with every perplexed president on the fine floor under the pickle ?
SENTENCE 9
every fine president with every pickle in every chief of staff in a sandwich in a chief of staff in the sandwich kissed every pickle under a pickled sandwich under every chief of staff under every floor on the delicious president on every floor on every president under the floor in the chief of staff !
SENTENCE 10
a president ate the sandwich !

2.
(a) The "NP -> NP PP" rules is responsible for most of the long sentences.  It can easily loop into itself, and also loop back to itself in combination with the "PP -> Prep NP" rules.
(b) The only way adjectives are attached to nouns is via the "Noun -> Adj Noun" rule, but that rule is crowded out by the 5 other Noun rules which replace a noun with a terminal symbol right away.  Hence sentences generated by the default grammar contains few adjectives.
(c) See file "randsent".
(d) We can fix the problem in (a) by increasing the frequency of the "NP -> Det Noun" rule.  The problem in (b) can be fixed by increasing the frequency of the "Noun -> Adj Noun" rule.
(e) See file "grammar2".
SENTENCE 1
the chief of staff wanted every floor !
SENTENCE 2
is it true that a chief of staff understood a president ?
SENTENCE 3
the chief of staff under the pickled president with the floor wanted every chief of staff .
SENTENCE 4
every president wanted the chief of staff under a fine chief of staff !
SENTENCE 5
every president wanted a president .
SENTENCE 6
a chief of staff wanted the delicious president .
SENTENCE 7
is it true that a chief of staff wanted every president ?
SENTENCE 8
every president wanted every president under a president under a chief of staff on a chief of staff with the chief of staff in every chief of staff .
SENTENCE 9
every floor wanted the president with every chief of staff .
SENTENCE 10
is it true that a floor wanted a floor ?

3. See file "grammar3".
SENTENCE 1
Kassad and every pickled president on Moneta and Moneta with Moneta and a chief of staff on the desk and Moneta sighed .
SENTENCE 2
Moneta wrote that every proposal disappeared .
SENTENCE 3
Moneta on every pickle disappeared !
SENTENCE 4
a proposal and Kassad and the proposal and Kassad on a sandwich and Sally with Sally on Moneta under Moneta with the pickle in a president in the desk disappeared !
SENTENCE 5
a chief of staff on Kassad in the desk on the delicious very delicious desk on Kassad understood Kassad .
SENTENCE 6
is it true that Sally exploded ?
SENTENCE 7
the president dreamt that every sandwich under the sandwich and every sandwich and Kassad understood every floor .
SENTENCE 8
is it true that Moneta pickled Moneta ?
SENTENCE 9
Sally wanted Moneta .
SENTENCE 10
is it true that the sandwich and Kassad pickled Kassad ?

4. See file "randsent".
TREE 1
(ROOT	(S	(NP	(Noun_Proper	Sally))
		(VP	(Verb_Intrans	sighed)))
	.)
TREE 2
(ROOT	that
	(S	(NP	(Det	a)
			(Noun	(Adj	perplexed)
				(Noun	(Adj	fine)
					(Noun	sandwich))))
		(VP	(Verb	pickled)
			(NP	(NP	(Noun_Proper	Moneta))
				and
				(NP	(Det	a)
					(Noun	proposal)))))
	(Verb_Passive	confused)
	(NP	(Noun_Proper	Moneta))
	.)
TREE 3
(ROOT	(S	(NP	(Noun_Proper	Kassad))
		(VP	(Verb_Intrans	exploded)))
	.)
TREE 4
(ROOT	that
	(S	(NP	(Noun_Proper	Kassad))
		(VP	(Verb	worked
				on)
			(NP	(Noun_Proper	Moneta))))
	(Verb_Passive	perplexed)
	(NP	(Noun_Proper	Sally))
	.)
TREE 5
(ROOT	is
	it
	true
	that
	(S	(NP	(Noun_Proper	Sally))
		(VP	(Verb	worked
				on)
			(NP	(Det	every)
				(Noun	proposal))))
	?)

5.
(a)
(Root	(S	(NP	(NP	(Det	every)
				(Noun	sandwich))
			(PP	(Prep	with)
				(NP	(NP	(Det	a)
						(Noun	pickle))
					(PP	(Prep	on)
						(NP	(Det	the)
							(Noun	floor))))))
		(VP	(Verb	wanted)
			(NP	(Det	a)
				(Noun	president))))
	.)

(b) Yes; depending on the derivation, the prepositional phrase "on the floor" may either be describing sandwiches or pickles.

6. I chose to implement parts C and D.  See "grammar6".

7. I decided to try to write a grammar to generate the 10 Commandments, as near to the Biblical wording as possible.  Since the original grammar and the extended grammars I've written for this assignment were not conducive to generating Biblical text, I started from scratch.  See "grammar7" for my best effort.  For reference, below is the version of the 10 Commandments I used as reference.  It is POSSIBLE to generate exactly this set of sentences with my grammar, just highly improbable.

I.	Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.
II.	Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image.
III.	Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
IV.	Remember the sabbath day.
V.	Honour thy father and thy mother.
VI.	Thou shalt not kill.
VII.	Thou shalt not commit adultery.
VIII.	Thou shalt not steal.
IX.	Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
X.	Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house or thy neighbor's wife or thy neighbor's manservent or thy neighbor's maidservent or thy neighbor's ox or thy neighbor's ass.